---
layout: post
title:  "Hello world!"
date:   2018-03-28 00:17:20 +0530
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
categories: General
description: Starting the blog took me some pain and I was skeptical about trying Jekyll at first. As it turns out, it's cool. Well, at least better than Wordpress (there will be a rant on my blog soon why wordpress is bad for business). This is more of a test post to get me acquainted with static page generation. Fear not, this blog is going to be all about software and development.
---	    

So, I thought I should start a blog, after failing quite a few times. I plan to keep this one permanent though. I decided to note down my experiences through this blog.

So, I have to admit it: I have **Kesha - Praying** playing in my ears right now, and starting off with a blog is painful. Now this one's more of a test post. I am trying to get used to markdown, it's pretty neat. I am building this blog on [Jekyll][jekyll-web] on Github pages, and that did take me some time to set up. I was pretty sure I wasn't going to use something like Wordpress and I sure wasn't going to build a CMS of my own. <!--more-->
I don't remember what stopped me the last time. I was confused with what theme to use, so I decided to use the default one. I realized I can tweak the default layouts, and that should work out pretty well. I am not sure if Jekyll can generate pages for me based on the current timestamp though, that would be very helpful.

Alright, I am gonna try some code highlighting now. I am lazy, I am just going to copy some code from my last project.

{% highlight java %}
package Marco.Threads;

import java.io.IOException;

public class LightOnThread extends Thread {
    public void run() {
	try {
	    Runtime runTime = Runtime.getRuntime();
	    Process process = runTime.exec("python3 "+ System.getProperty("user.home")+"/MarcoExt/Scripts/LightOn2.py");
	}
	catch (IOException e ) {
	    e.printStackTrace();
	}
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

Ugh, the code makes no sense. But well, it works. I guess I should fix the font size, it's too big for my eyes. Guess this works neatly though. I might end up staying with it.

Alright, Imma sleep now. Just tired for now reason. I am taking this week off. So, meh. Goodnight!

_Dedipyaman_

[jekyll-web]: https://jekyllrb.com
